README.md, before:

# Reading single line

This is a task for an interview.

## Content

<!-- TOC -->
* [Reading single line](#reading-single-line)
  * [Content](#content)
  * [Task description](#task-description)
  * [High level class diagram](#high-level-class-diagram)
  * [High level algorithm](#high-level-algorithm)
  * [Text file](#text-file)
  * [Index file](#index-file)
    * [Structure](#structure)
<!-- TOC -->

## Task description

You are given a very, very large plain text file where each line contains a plain text string. The
file has at most 1 billion lines; lines may have different lengths, but each line has at most 1000
characters. Your goal is to write a program that will print an arbitrary line from the file. Your
program will be run many times (although you don't know exactly how many times it will be run in
advance), and you don't know in advance which lines might be selected. Thus, your solution should be
optimized to minimize the runtime for each additional execution. The first execution of the program
may take longer than subsequent runs, and you may use additional disk storage to improve
performance. Your program should take two command-line arguments: the path of the input file from
which to print lines, and the index of the line you want to print. Your program should write the
line to standard output.

## High level class diagram

```mermaid
classDiagram
    class FilePartReader {
        <<interface>>
        +readFilePart(byteFrom: number, byteTo: number) Promise~Buffer~
        +readFilePartByPart() AsyncGenerator~Buffer~
    }
    class FilePartStreamReader {
        +readFilePart(byteFrom: number, byteTo: number) Promise~Buffer~
        +readFilePartByPart(): AsyncGenerator<Buffer>
    }
    class LineGetter {
        +getLine(lineIndexNumber: number) Promise~string~
    }
    class LineIndexReader {
        <<interface>>
        +getLineLocation(lineIndexNumber: number) Promise~LineLocation~
    }
    class LineIndexWriter {
        <<interface>>
        +pushBack(lineStartByte: number) Promise~void~
    }
    class LineIndexBuilder {
        +buildLineIndex() Promise~void~
    }
    class LineIndexFileReader {
        +getLineLocation(lineIndexNumber: number) Promise~LineLocation~
    }
    class LineIndexFileWriter {
        +pushBack(startByte: number) Promise~void~
    }
    FilePartStreamReader --|> FilePartReader
    LineIndexFileReader --|> LineIndexReader
    LineIndexFileWriter --|> LineIndexWriter
    LineGetter o-- FilePartReader
    LineGetter o-- LineIndexReader
    LineIndexBuilder o-- FilePartReader
    LineIndexBuilder o-- LineIndexWriter
    LineIndexFileReader o-- FilePartReader
```

## High level algorithm

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    ParamsParsing: Parse CLI parameters
    state FileExistenceVerification <<choice>>
    state IndexExistenceVerification <<choice>>
    TextFileExists: Text file exists
    ReadWholeTextFile: Read whole text file and write \n to index file where each line starts
    IndexBuilt: Index file is built
    ReadIndex: Read two numbers from the index
    state TwoNumberVerification <<choice>>
    OneNumber: Read just bytes from the given number \n to the end of the file
    TwoNumbers: Read just bytes between those \n two numbers from the text file
    PrintLine: Print the line
    
    [*] --> ParamsParsing
    ParamsParsing --> FileExistenceVerification: Does text file exist?
    FileExistenceVerification --> TextFileExists: Yes
    FileExistenceVerification --> [*]: No
    TextFileExists --> IndexExistenceVerification: Does index file exist?
    IndexExistenceVerification --> ReadWholeTextFile: No
    ReadWholeTextFile --> IndexBuilt
    IndexBuilt --> ReadIndex
    IndexExistenceVerification --> ReadIndex: Yes
    ReadIndex --> TwoNumberVerification: Two or one number was read?
    TwoNumberVerification --> OneNumber: One number
    note right of OneNumber: case for the last line of the text file
    TwoNumberVerification --> TwoNumbers: Two numbers
    OneNumber --> PrintLine
    TwoNumbers --> PrintLine
    PrintLine --> [*]
```

## Text file

Text file can contain at most one billion (1 000 000 000) lines. Each line can contain at most 1000
characters, unless it can be more than 1000 bytes. Besides new line characters, one character can be
can use more than 1 byte. So multibyte characters are supported. Also, all main platforms are
supported, in terms of new lines:

- Windows: uses 2 bytes for a new line: CR + LF
- Linux: uses just one byte: LF
- Mac: uses just one byte: CR 

## Index file

It takes some time to create an index file. But if it exists, any line can be printed almost instantly.

### Structure

It is a binary file. There are 8 bytes (unsigned 64-bit integer) per line in the text file. Integers
are put next to each other without any delimiter. Each number determines where the line begins on
the disk, of course relatively. So the first line always starts on byte 0. For following lines, it
works like this:

```
[beginning of the first line] = 0
[beginning of the second line] = [length of the first line] + [1 or 2 bytes for a new line characters] + 1
[beginning of the third line] = [beginning of the second line] + [length of the second line] + [1 or 2 bytes for a new line characters] + 1
```

Commit message:

improve code improve error handling improve performance add unit tests improve readme

README.md, after:

# Reading single line

This is a task for an interview.

## Content

<!-- TOC -->
* [Reading single line](#reading-single-line)
  * [Content](#content)
  * [Task description](#task-description)
  * [High level class diagram](#high-level-class-diagram)
  * [High level algorithm](#high-level-algorithm)
  * [Text file](#text-file)
  * [Index file](#index-file)
    * [Structure](#structure)
  * [How to run it](#how-to-run-it)
<!-- TOC -->

## Task description

You are given a very, very large plain text file where each line contains a plain text string. The
file has at most 1 billion lines; lines may have different lengths, but each line has at most 1000
characters. Your goal is to write a program that will print an arbitrary line from the file. Your
program will be run many times (although you don't know exactly how many times it will be run in
advance), and you don't know in advance which lines might be selected. Thus, your solution should be
optimized to minimize the runtime for each additional execution. The first execution of the program
may take longer than subsequent runs, and you may use additional disk storage to improve
performance. Your program should take two command-line arguments: the path of the input file from
which to print lines, and the index of the line you want to print. Your program should write the
line to standard output.

## High level class diagram

```mermaid
classDiagram
    class FilePartReader {
        <<interface>>
        +readFilePart(byteFrom: number, byteTo: number) Promise~Buffer~
        +readFilePartByPart() AsyncGenerator~Buffer~
    }
    class FilePartStreamReader {
        +readFilePart(byteFrom: number, byteTo: number) Promise~Buffer~
        +readFilePartByPart(): AsyncGenerator<Buffer>
    }
    class LineGetter {
        +getLine(lineIndexNumber: number) Promise~string~
    }
    class LineIndexReader {
        <<interface>>
        +getLineLocation(lineIndexNumber: number) Promise~LineLocation~
    }
    class LineIndexWriter {
        <<interface>>
        +pushBack(lineStartByte: number) Promise~void~
    }
    class LineIndexBuilder {
        +buildLineIndex() Promise~void~
    }
    class LineIndexFileReader {
        +getLineLocation(lineIndexNumber: number) Promise~LineLocation~
    }
    class LineIndexFileWriter {
        +pushBack(startByte: number) Promise~void~
    }
    FilePartStreamReader --|> FilePartReader
    LineIndexFileReader --|> LineIndexReader
    LineIndexFileWriter --|> LineIndexWriter
    LineGetter o-- FilePartReader
    LineGetter o-- LineIndexReader
    LineIndexBuilder o-- FilePartReader
    LineIndexBuilder o-- LineIndexWriter
    LineIndexFileReader o-- FilePartReader
```

## High level algorithm

```mermaid
stateDiagram-v2
    ParamsParsing: Parse CLI parameters
    state FileExistenceVerification <<choice>>
    state IndexExistenceVerification <<choice>>
    TextFileExists: Text file exists
    ReadWholeTextFile: Read whole text file and write \n to index file where each line starts
    IndexBuilt: Index file is built
    ReadIndex: Read two numbers from the index
    state TwoNumberVerification <<choice>>
    OneNumber: Read just bytes from the given number \n to the end of the file
    TwoNumbers: Read just bytes between those \n two numbers from the text file
    PrintLine: Print the line
    
    [*] --> ParamsParsing
    ParamsParsing --> FileExistenceVerification: Does text file exist?
    FileExistenceVerification --> TextFileExists: Yes
    FileExistenceVerification --> [*]: No
    TextFileExists --> IndexExistenceVerification: Does index file exist?
    IndexExistenceVerification --> ReadWholeTextFile: No
    ReadWholeTextFile --> IndexBuilt
    IndexBuilt --> ReadIndex
    IndexExistenceVerification --> ReadIndex: Yes
    ReadIndex --> TwoNumberVerification: Two or one number was read?
    TwoNumberVerification --> OneNumber: One number
    note right of OneNumber: case for the last line of the text file
    TwoNumberVerification --> TwoNumbers: Two numbers
    OneNumber --> PrintLine
    TwoNumbers --> PrintLine
    PrintLine --> [*]
```

## Text file

Text file can contain at most one billion (1 000 000 000) lines. Each line can contain at most 1000
characters, unless it can be more than 1000 bytes. Besides new line characters, one character can be
can use more than 1 byte. So multibyte characters are supported. Also, all main platforms are
supported, in terms of new lines:

- Windows: uses 2 bytes for a new line: CR + LF
- Linux: uses just one byte: LF
- Mac: uses just one byte: CR 

## Index file

To improve performance in following runs, it creates an index file. It takes some time to create an
index file. But if it exists, any line can be printed almost instantly.

### Structure

It is a binary file. There are 8 bytes (unsigned 64-bit integer) per line in the text file. Integers
are put next to each other without any delimiter. Each number determines where the line begins on
the disk, of course relatively. So the first line always starts on byte 0. For following lines, it
works like this:

```
[beginning of the first line] = 0
[beginning of the second line] = [length of the first line] + [1 or 2 bytes for a new line characters] + 1
[beginning of the third line] = [beginning of the second line] + [length of the second line] + [1 or 2 bytes for a new line characters] + 1
```

## How to run it

To run this application use these commands:

```
npm install
npx ts-node src/main.ts <path to file> <line index> 
```

To generate text file, use this tool:

```
npm run generate-file
```

or if ts-node cannot be found:

```
npx ts-node tools/generateFile.ts
```

The number of lines, which should be generated, and name of the output file can be changed directly
in the script.
